docs: form and display pill group (#1879)
twilio-labs/paste: packages/paste-website/src/pages/components/form-pill-group/index.mdx

            Code
            status
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
`;

<ComponentHeader
  name={props.pageContext.frontmatter.title}
  categoryRoute={SidebarCategoryRoutes.COMPONENTS}
  githubUrl="https://github.com/twilio-labs/paste/tree/main/packages/paste-core/components/form-pill-group"
  storybookUrl="/?path=/story/components-form-pill-group--basic"
  data={props.data.allPasteComponent.edges}
  packageStatus={props.data.allAirtable.edges}
/>

---

<contentwrapper>

<PageAside data={props.data.mdx} />

<content>

<LivePreview scope={{FormPill, FormPillGroup, useFormPillState, CalendarIcon}} noInline>
  {defaultExample}
</LivePreview>

## Guidelines

### About Form Pill Group

<Paragraph>
  {props.pageContext.frontmatter.description} They are used almost exclusively in multi-select editing situations.
</Paragraph>

A Form Pill Group can be used on it's own to represent selection across a number of fields, such as displaying currently applied filters when filtering data across a number of different fields. Alternatively, a Form Pill Group can be paired directly to a single input field, such as a Combobox, to represent multiple selection.

#### Accessibility

> The Form Pill Group provides a number of accessibility features. The only requirement from you, is to provide the Pill Group a descriptive label via the `aria-label` React prop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Form Pill Group provides a number of accessibility features. The only requirement is providing the Pill Group a descriptive label via the `aria-label` React prop.
```

##### Keyboard navigation

The Form Pill Group is focusable, but only one pill is focusable at a time. This means the Pill Group is a single tab stop to a keyboard user. Once focused within the Pill Group the following keyboard interactions apply.

- Left and Right arrow keys move focus within the group

> - If selectable, spacebar and enter will toggle pill selection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If a pill is selectable, spacebar and enter will toggle pill selection
```

- If a pill has a supplied action via `onClick`, enter key will trigger that action

> - If dismissable, a Pill can be removed by pressing the delete or backspace key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If a pill is dismissable, the pill can be removed by pressing the delete or backspace key
```

<Box marginBottom="space70">
  <AspectRatio ratio="16:9">
    <iframe
      src="https://www.loom.com/embed/1bea986ec6a24cd494950e2c12f10562"
      frameborder="0"
      webkitallowfullscreen
      mozallowfullscreen
      allowfullscreen
      title="Silent demo on keyboard navigation"
    ></iframe>
  </AspectRatio>

> </Box>

Reviewer: I love this video!! Succinct but detailed, and I feel like I got a lot out of it even just watching it the first time! It pairs quite nicely with the list above there. Big win here!

Reviewer 2: 🔥

#### Display Pill vs Form Pill

There are some very important semantic differences between a Display Pill and Form Pill group. Below is a table explaining the main differences to get a better understanding of when to use each type of Pill.

<FormPillVsDisplayPillTable />

## Examples

### Basic Form Pill Group

The basic Form Pill Group can be composed by adding `FormPill` components as children of `FormPillGroup`. These must be used with the `useFormPillState` hook, and the returned state should be spread onto each component.

This will provide you with some internal state management and keyboard navigation.

<LivePreview scope={{FormPill, FormPillGroup, useFormPillState, CalendarIcon}} noInline>
  {defaultExample}
</LivePreview>

### Selectable Form Pill Group

> Outside of keyboard navigation, Form Pills are presentational. If you would like to make the Pill Group provide selection options, you can manage the state of those pills and seemlessly merge it with the state return from the `useFormPillState` hook.

Reviewer: I think this paragraph could be clearer. I don't know what Form Pills being "presentational" means, and why that's different in comparison to keyboard nav. Also it would be useful to provide a use case example for making the Form Pill Group "provide selection options", since I'm having a hard time picturing what's meant by that as well.

Author: I think I made it better?

> Track which pill is selected in a separate store of state. When rendering the Pill Group, cross reference the pills with the selected state, and conditoinally set `selected` on each `FormPill` that requires it.

Reviewer: Earlier it's mentioned that useFormPillState() handles some internal state management. Why is it that there needs to be a separate state storage for tracking selection?

Author: Mainly because we don't own that data. The data being what pills to render and what state to render them in. That's up to the apps business logic. 

Where as keyboard nav is the concern of the component. It needs to know about where it is in the collection for it to work correctly.

The `onSelect` event handler will fire when ever the pill is clicked, or the spacebar or enter key is pressed. Use this to respond to your users selection interactions.

<LivePreview scope={{FormPill, FormPillGroup, useFormPillState, CalendarIcon}} noInline>
  {selectableExample}
</LivePreview>

### Removable Form Pill Group

> For removable Form Pills, because the Form Pill Group is largely presentational, you can provide removable functionality by managing the state of the rendered Pills. By responding to user interactions, hooking into the `onDismiss` event handler, you are able to update the rendered state of the Form Pill Group and selectively remove pills from the collection.
> 
> The `onDismiss` event handler will fire when a user clicks on the close x, or presses their backspace or delete key when foused on a pill.

Reviewer: I think it's worth writing explicitly that Form Pills become removable when you give them an onDismiss handler
```suggestion
Form Pills are given a closing x button when provided an onDismiss event handler. Because the Form Pill Group is largely presentational, you can provide "removable" functionality by managing the state of the rendered Pills. By responding to user interactions and hooking into the `onDismiss` event handler, the rendered state of the Form Pill Group can be updated and pills can be selectively removed from the collection.

The `onDismiss` event handler will fire when a user clicks on the close x, or presses their backspace or delete key when foused on a pill.
```

<LivePreview scope={{FormPill, FormPillGroup, useFormPillState, CalendarIcon}} noInline>
  {removableExample}
</LivePreview>

## Composition Notes

### When to use a Form Pill Group

> Use Form Pill Groups when you are editing a collection of data within a form. It can be used to represent selection across multiple fields such as filtering, or from a single field like a combobox.

Reviewer: We don't actually have an example of them being used in a form on these docs. I feel like having one would legitimize this ask.

Author: Oh my... 🤦🏼

Author: Actually I kind of take that back. They are in form elements, and a form can be a form of one field. So these are nice isolated examples of just the component on its own to make it super explicit that it is independent of everything else.

I would like maybe one more example though potentially as a composite. Maybe filtering?

Reviewer: Yeah, having an example of some sort (which I think filtering is a good one) would help because at the moment, the examples on both this and display pill group look really similar. The more apparent we can make the differentiation btw these two components, the better.

Reviewer 3: yesss +1 to an example, even if it's in the do/don't section only

If it's paired with the Multiselect Combobox primitive, it'd be nice to have a copy-paste-able example for people.

Author: Updated the primitive combobox example to use pills and imported that here

---
title: Form Pill Group
package: '@twilio-paste/form-pill-group'

> description: A Form Pill Group is an editable set of Pills used to visually represent a collection of entities when inside an edit form.

Reviewer 2: why did I read this as "edible"

> description: A Form Pill Group is an editable set of Pills used to visually represent a collection of entities when inside an edit form.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
description: A Form Pill Group is an editable set of Pills used to visually represent a collection of entities inside a form field.
```

      frontmatter {
        slug
        title
      }
      headings {
        depth
        value
      }
    }
    allAirtable(filter: {data: {Feature: {eq: "Form Pill Group"}}}) {
      edges {
        node {
          data {
            Documentation
            Figma
            Design_committee_review
            Engineer_committee_review
            Code
            status
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
`;

<ComponentHeader
  name={props.pageContext.frontmatter.title}
  categoryRoute={SidebarCategoryRoutes.COMPONENTS}
  githubUrl="https://github.com/twilio-labs/paste/tree/main/packages/paste-core/components/form-pill-group"
  storybookUrl="/?path=/story/components-form-pill-group--basic"
  data={props.data.allPasteComponent.edges}
  packageStatus={props.data.allAirtable.edges}
/>

---

<contentwrapper>

<PageAside data={props.data.mdx} />

<content>

<LivePreview scope={{FormPill, FormPillGroup, useFormPillState, CalendarIcon}} noInline>
  {defaultExample}
</LivePreview>

## Guidelines

### About Form Pill Group

<Paragraph>
  {props.pageContext.frontmatter.description} They are used almost exclusively in multi-select editing situations.
</Paragraph>

> A Form Pill Group can be used on it's own to represent selection across a number of fields, such as displaying currently applied filters when filtering data across a number of different fields. Alternatively, a Form Pill Group can be paired directly to a single input field, such as a Combobox, to represent multiple selection.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A Form Pill Group can be used on its own to represent selection across a number of fields, such as displaying currently applied filters when filtering data across a number of different fields. Alternatively, a Form Pill Group can be paired directly to a single input field, such as a Combobox, to represent multiple selection.
```

#### Accessibility

The Form Pill Group provides a number of accessibility features. The only requirement is providing the Pill Group a descriptive label via the `aria-label` React prop.

##### Keyboard navigation

> The Form Pill Group is focusable, but only one pill is focusable at a time. This means the Pill Group is a single tab stop to a keyboard user. Once focused within the Pill Group the following keyboard interactions apply.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Form Pill Group is focusable, but only one pill is focusable at a time. This means the Pill Group is a single tab stop to a keyboard user. Once a user is focused within the Pill Group, the following keyboard interactions apply:
```

> - Left and Right arrow keys move focus within the group

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Left and right arrow keys move focus within the group
```

- If a pill is selectable, spacebar and enter will toggle pill selection
- If a pill has a supplied action via `onClick`, enter key will trigger that action

> - If a pill is dismissable, the pill can be removed by pressing the delete or backspace key

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If a pill is dismissible, the pill can be removed by pressing the delete or backspace key
```

<Box marginBottom="space70">
  <AspectRatio ratio="16:9">
    <iframe
      src="https://www.loom.com/embed/1bea986ec6a24cd494950e2c12f10562"
      frameborder="0"
      webkitallowfullscreen
      mozallowfullscreen
      allowfullscreen
      title="Silent demo on keyboard navigation"
    ></iframe>
  </AspectRatio>
</Box>

> #### Display Pill vs Form Pill
> 
> There are some very important semantic differences between a Display Pill and Form Pill group. Below is a table explaining the main differences to get a better understanding of when to use each type of Pill.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Display Pill vs. Form Pill

There are some very important semantic differences between a Display Pill and Form Pill Group. Below is a table explaining the main differences to get a better understanding of when to use each type of pill.
```

<FormPillVsDisplayPillTable />

## Examples

### Basic Form Pill Group

The basic Form Pill Group can be composed by adding `FormPill` components as children of `FormPillGroup`. These must be used with the `useFormPillState` hook, and the returned state should be spread onto each component.

This will provide you with some internal state management and keyboard navigation.

<LivePreview scope={{FormPill, FormPillGroup, useFormPillState, CalendarIcon}} noInline>
  {defaultExample}
</LivePreview>

### Selectable Form Pill Group

> If you would like to make the Pill Group have selectable pill, you should manage the selection state yourself and combine it with the state returned from the `useFormPillState` hook.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To make pills inside the Pill Group selectable, manage the selection state yourself and combine it with the state returned from the `useFormPillState` hook.
```

To do so, track which pill is selected in a separate store of state. When rendering the Pill Group, cross reference the rendered pills with the selection state, and conditoinally set `selected` on each `FormPill` that requires it.

> The `onSelect` event handler will fire when ever the pill is clicked, or the spacebar or enter key is pressed. Use this to respond to your users selection interactions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `onSelect` event handler will fire when ever the pill is clicked, or the spacebar or enter key is pressed. Use this to respond to your users' selection interactions.
```

<LivePreview scope={{FormPill, FormPillGroup, useFormPillState, CalendarIcon}} noInline>
  {selectableExample}
</LivePreview>

### Removable Form Pill Group

> Form Pills are given a closing x button when provided an onDismiss event handler. Because the Form Pill Group is largely presentational, you can provide "removable" functionality by managing the state of the rendered Pills. By responding to user interactions and hooking into the `onDismiss` event handler, the rendered state of the Form Pill Group can be updated and pills can be selectively removed from the collection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Form Pills are given a closing x button when provided an `onDismiss` event handler. Because the Form Pill Group is largely presentational, you can provide "removable" functionality by managing the state of the rendered Pills. By responding to user interactions and hooking into the `onDismiss` event handler, the rendered state of the Form Pill Group can be updated and pills can be selectively removed from the collection.
```

> Form Pills are given a closing x button when provided an `onDismiss` event handler. Because the Form Pill Group is largely presentational, you can provide "removable" functionality by managing the state of the rendered Pills. By responding to user interactions and hooking into the `onDismiss` event handler, the rendered state of the Form Pill Group can be updated and pills can be selectively removed from the collection.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Form Pills are given a closing "x" button when provided an `onDismiss` event handler. Because the Form Pill Group is largely presentational, you can provide "removable" functionality by managing the state of the rendered pills. By responding to user interactions and hooking into the `onDismiss` event handler, the rendered state of the Form Pill Group can be updated and pills can be selectively removed from the collection.
```

The `onDismiss` event handler will fire when a user clicks on the close x, or presses their backspace or delete key when foused on a pill.

<LivePreview scope={{FormPill, FormPillGroup, useFormPillState, CalendarIcon}} noInline>
  {removableExample}
</LivePreview>

## Composition Notes

### When to use a Form Pill Group

Use Form Pill Groups when you are editing a collection of data within a form. It can be used to represent selection across multiple fields such as filtering, or from a single field like a combobox.

<DoDont>

>   <Do title="Do" body="Use Form Pills in editable forms to represent a collection of similar entities" />

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  <Do title="Do" body="Use Form Pills in editable forms to represent a collection of similar entities." />
```

  <Dont title="Don't" body="Don't use Form Pills outside of a form or editing scenarios." />
</DoDont>

<DoDont>

>   <Do title="Do" body="Only pass FormPill as a direct descendent of a FormPillGroup" />
>   <Dont
>     title="Don't"
>     body="Don't pass FormPillGroup any other component type, and do not wrap Form Pills in any other component of DOM element"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  <Do title="Do" body="Only pass FormPill as a direct descendent of a FormPillGroup." />
  <Dont
    title="Don't"
    body="Don't pass FormPillGroup any other component type, and do not wrap FormPill in any other component of DOM element."
```

  />
</DoDont>

---

## Usage Guide

### API

#### Installation

```bash
yarn add @twilio-paste/form-pill-group - or - yarn add @twilio-paste/core
```

#### Usage

```jsx
import {useFormPillState, FormPillGroup, FormPill} from '@twilio-paste/form-pill-group';

export const Basic = () => {
  const pillState = useFormPillState();

  return (
    <form>
      <FormPillGroup {...pillState} data-testid="form-pill-group" aria-label="Your favorite sports:">
        <FormPill data-testid="form-pill" {...pillState}>
          <CalendarIcon decorative size="sizeIcon10" />
          Tennis
        </FormPill>
        <FormPill {...pillState} selected data-testid="form-pill-selected">
          Baseball
        </FormPill>
        <FormPill {...pillState}>Football</FormPill>
        <FormPill {...pillState} selected>
          Soccer
        </FormPill>
      </FormPillGroup>
    </form>
  );
};
```

#### Props

##### FormPillGroup

> **N.B:** Most required props are provided by spreading the returned state from `useFormPillState`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Note:** Most required props are provided by spreading the returned state from `useFormPillState`.
```

###### `aria-label: string`

Defines a string value that labels the current element.

###### `move: (id: string | null) => void`

Moves focus to a given item ID.

###### `first: () => void`

Moves focus to the first item.

###### `last: () => void`

Moves focus to the first item.

###### `items: Item[]`

Lists all the pill items with their id, DOM ref, disabled state and groupId if any. This state is automatically updated when registerItem and unregisterItem are called.

###### `setCurrentId: Dispatch<SetStateAction<string | null | undefined>>`

Lists all the pill items with their id, DOM ref, disabled state and groupId if any. This state is automatically updated when registerItem and unregisterItem are called.

###### `element?: string`

Set a custom element name. Default: `FORM_PILL_GROUP`

###### `focusable?: boolean`

When an element is disabled, it may still be focusable. It works similarly to readOnly on form elements. In this case, only aria-disabled will be set.

###### `disabled?: boolean`

Same as the HTML attribute.

###### `baseId?: string`

ID that will serve as a base for all the items IDs.

###### `currentId?: string`

> The current focused item id. - undefined will automatically focus the first enabled composite item. - null will focus the base composite element and users will be able to navigate out of it using arrow keys. - If currentId is initially set to null, the base composite element itself will have focus and users will be able to navigate to it using arrow keys.

Reviewer 3: Is this supposed to be a list?

Author: Is now

###### `groups?: Group[]`

Lists all the composite groups with their id and DOM ref. This state is automatically updated when registerGroup and unregisterGroup are called.

---

##### FormPill

> **N.B:** Most required props are provided by spreading the returned state from `useFormPillState`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Note:** Most required props are provided by spreading the returned state from `useFormPillState`.
```

###### `baseId: string`

ID that will serve as a base for all the items IDs.

###### `setBaseId: string`

Sets baseId

###### `rtl: boolean`

Determines how next and previous functions will behave. If rtl is set to true, they will be inverted. This only affects the composite widget behavior. You still need to set dir="rtl" on HTML/CSS.

###### `items: Item[]`

Lists all the composite items with their id, DOM ref, disabled state and groupId if any. This state is automatically updated when registerItem and unregisterItem are called.

###### `groups: Group[]`

Lists all the composite groups with their id and DOM ref. This state is automatically updated when registerGroup and unregisterGroup are called.

###### `loop: boolean`

On one-dimensional composites: - true loops from the last item to the first item and vice-versa. - horizontal loops only if orientation is horizontal or not set. - vertical loops only if orientation is vertical or not set. - If currentId is initially set to null, the composite element will be focused in between the last and first items.

###### `wrap: boolean`

> Has effect only on two-dimensional composites. If enabled, moving to the next item from the last one in a row or column will focus the first item in the next row or column and vice-versa. - true wraps between rows and columns. - horizontal wraps only between rows. - vertical wraps only between columns. - If loop matches the value of wrap, it'll wrap between the last item in the last row or column and the first item in the first row or column and vice-versa.

Reviewer 3: Assuming these are also lists. And the other ones below.

The `onDismiss` event handler will fire when a user clicks on the close x, or presses their backspace or delete key when foused on a pill.

<LivePreview scope={{FormPill, FormPillGroup, useFormPillState, CalendarIcon, Text}} noInline>
  {removableExample}
</LivePreview>

### Simple Multiselect Combobox Example

Using Form Pill Group, along with the [Combobox Primitive](/primitives/combobox-primitive#multiselect-combobox-example) you can easily compose an interactive multiple select form field.

<LivePreview
  scope={{
    useComboboxPrimitive,
    useMultiSelectPrimitive,
    Box,
    Label,
    Input,
    useUID,
    useUIDSeed,
    ComboboxListbox,
    ComboboxListboxGroup,
    ComboboxListboxOption,
    FormPill,
    FormPillGroup,
    useFormPillState,
  }}
  noInline
  language="jsx"
>
  {multiSelectExample}

> </LivePreview>

Reviewer 3: Any chance you could make this autocomplete, or put the chevron in the field?

Otherwise it looks like customer should be able to type in the field, but it doesn't allow for it.

Author: Hmmm this is turning out to be way more scope than just Pill docs to get this to work. So two choices:

1) example stays as is
2) example is removed.
